My name's Charlotte Wickham and I'm a developer educator on the Quarto team at Posit.
It's been a little over a year since we introduced Quarto and the team has been working really
hard on some new features.
I know you can get so caught up actually working with your tools that it's hard to keep up
with the changes in those tools.
So think about this as your annual holiday letter from a fond but far away friend, updating
you on the highlights of the year.
I'll focus on the things that I think are most useful to you as an author of Quarto
documents, grouped into three categories.
Content, these are things you can add to any Quarto document that enhance or add content
to that document.
Projects, a couple of features that make it easier to work with collections of Quarto
documents.
And tools, these are enhancements to the tools you might use to author Quarto documents.
Before we jump in, let me give you a little context on Quarto versions.
Quarto 1.0 was the version when Quarto was released last year.
Quarto 1.1 and 1.2 were released before the end of the year and Quarto 1.3 was released
in April this year, 2023.
Quarto 1.3 is the current release, that means it's the one you'll find when you head to
our downloads page on quarto.org and it's the version that the documentation describes.
We do release updates to the current release but those updates are somewhat infrequent.
Some of the features I'll describe today are coming in Quarto 1.4 and if you want to try
them out, you'll need to download what we call the pre-release.
The pre-release is a snapshot of the main branch of Git repo and as such, it's updated
really frequently.
So, if you're going to sit down and do something with the pre-release, you want to make sure
you grab the latest version from quarto.org.
If you aren't sure which version of Quarto you have, you can use the version option to
Quarto on the command line.
Okay, let's jump in to some new content features.
The first feature I want to show you is the embed shortcode.
Imagine you've got a Quarto document and you've imported some data, done some processing,
done some exploration and you've landed at a visualization that you really want to include
in another document.
I'll call this document with all the code that gets to the visualization, the source
document.
What you want to end up with is another document, I'll call it the destination, with just this
visualization in it.
The embed shortcode lets you do that with one line.
Let's see.
Here's that source document and the code chunk that generates the visualization.
We'll need a way to identify the cell, so let's add a label.
I'll call it fig-scatter.
Then in the destination document, I'll use the shortcode.
The embed shortcode requires a path to the source file, followed by a cell identifier.
That's it.
The cell options come from the source document, so if you want to add a caption, you'll need
to do that in the source document.
When rendered, the output from that source document will be included in the destination
document.
In HTML formats, you also get a link back to a rendered version of that source document.
The embed shortcode was introduced in Corto 1.3, but only when the source was a Jupyter
notebook.
In Corto 1.4, you'll be able to do embeds from QMD documents too.
Corto 1.4 is bringing some big changes to cross-references.
In particular, you'll be able to make almost anything a cross-referenceable element.
All the current cross-reference syntax will still work, but Corto 1.4 adds some new syntax
that's more flexible.
To define a cross-referenceable element, you'll need to create a div with an ID that has a
prefix that Corto recognizes as a cross-reference.
So for instance, here, the triple colons indicate the div, followed by an ID starting
with fig, that lets Corto know that this is a figure cross-reference.
Then comes the content for this element, and then the final line will be interpreted as
the caption.
Then I can refer back to this element using the usual syntax, an at symbol followed by
the ID of the element.
When rendered, Corto adds figure, along with a counter, and generates the text and link
wherever I refer back to this element.
With this new syntax, I can put almost anything inside this div.
I could put a code cell inside and call it a figure, or I could put an image inside,
and by changing the prefix to tbl, call it a table.
The other new thing you'll be able to do is define custom types of cross-reference in
your YAML.
The keynames here are still a work in progress, but essentially, you decide what the prefix
will be that will identify this as a cross-reference in the div ID, and the labels used in the
caption, and for the in-text references.
Here I'm defining one that will represent diagrams.
Then you can switch to this new type of cross-reference, and now you have control over the text used
to represent this reference.
Each type of cross-reference maintains its own counter, so defining a new type of cross-reference
also gives you a way to restart a counter.
This next feature is specific to the Jupyter engine, and it adds a feature that Nitar users
have had for a long time, an easy way to get computed values inline.
So for example, imagine you had a document with a Python code cell that defined the variable
radius, and what you want in your output is a sentence that refers to the value in that
variable.
It used to be that you'd need a code cell, and inside that code cell, you would have
to generate the markdown for that entire sentence, and then feed it into the markdown function.
Auto 1.4 introduces a new syntax for inline execution, single backticks, followed by Python
and curly braces, followed by the code to be executed.
In this case, we're just grabbing the variable itself.
Or if you happen to use the Julia Jupyter kernel, you could swap this out for a Julia
example as well.
The final content features I want to talk about are really useful if you tend to write
about code, and you want to add additional context for your readers.
For example, imagine seeing this code in a rendered document.
It happens to be YAML, and it was produced with this markdown in its source.
I think the first piece of context people need when they're looking at code is where
this code is.
In this case, this is code you'd find in the __corto.yaml file in a Corto project.
You can add that by adding the filename attribute to the code cell, which adds a header to the
code cell in the rendered output.
Here, the code lives in an actual file, but the filename attribute doesn't have to be
a filename.
For instance, you might say, this code is written in the terminal, or this code is written
on the R console.
The other feature for adding context to code is code annotation.
Code annotation lets you add comments about specific lines of code.
For HTML output, I really like the hover setting, where the annotation is only revealed on hover
so that it doesn't distract from the code.
Adding code annotation is a matter of adding specially formatted comments to the code itself,
along with an ordered list directly following the code.
Now, switching to projects.
Because they involve many files, Corto projects can sometimes be a little bit more complicated
to get started.
Create is a Corto command introduced in 1.2 that makes it really easy to produce a minimal
working project.
Here I am on the terminal running corto create.
This then runs through an interactive prompt, where I can select I want to create a project
of type website in the directory test-website.
Corto then creates that directory and populates it with a minimal working set of files.
This works in any terminal, but because I use the RStudio terminal, Corto will create
an RStudio project file and open up that project for me.
Then I might build it just to see what I've got.
I love using the interactive prompt, but you can also specify all those options as part
of the command.
This is a really handy way to build small reproducible examples of projects, or to get
started with a project type that's new to you.
The other project feature I want to show you are what's called project profiles.
Imagine you've got a project where you need variations of basically the same content,
but for different audiences or different venues.
So for example, maybe you want a version of a report to share with external stakeholders,
and another version for internal use that has a little bit more detail.
Your project might start like this, a corto file report.qmd, where I've just got a placeholder
for some content that everyone might see.
Get underscore corto dot yaml, with some project level information, like the project
title, and a location for the rendered output to go, in this case a folder called external.
So if I was to render this project, I'd get this report dot html in the folder external.
This represents rendering without a profile activated.
To add a profile, you add another corto configuration file, but with an extra suffix.
I'm going to call mine underscore corto dash internal dot yaml.
To activate the profile, you can add the profile option to the render command.
So here I'm running corto render, with profile set to internal.
When activated, the options in the profile configuration file are merged with those in
the default configuration file.
I'm going to add a different output directory to my internal profile.
Let me say internal.
Then, when I render with this profile activated, I get this report dot html in the internal
folder.
Not very exciting yet, but I can use this profile to start making changes that distinguish
the internal output from my default output.
So just to visually make a distinction, I could add a theme to my internal profile.
In addition to having a profile apply different options, you can also use it to control content.
Let's take another look at report dot qmd.
I'm going to add some content that I want only visible in the internal report.
To have it show up only when the internal profile is activated, I can put it inside
a div and add the content visible class with the when profile attribute set to internal.
Now if I render both with and without the internal profile activated, I get these two
versions.
Report dot html in the external folder has only one section, and report dot html in the
internal folder has two.
The biggest changes in authoring tools are to our extensions for Visual Studio Code and
JupyterLab.
The Visual Studio Code extension now has a visual editor, just like RStudio.
When you enter the visual editor, you get a what-you-see-is-what-you-get editing experience
for your Koto documents.
For example, rather than seeing markdown syntax, you see formatted text.
One of the nicest features of the visual editor is the insert anything tool.
Simply type a forward slash, and you'll get a dropdown of all the content types you might
insert.
A nice example is insert table.
And if you only need one reason to use the visual editor, it should be for editing tables
without having to worry about markdown syntax.
Another nice feature in the Visual Studio Code extension is completion for citations
and cross-references.
Simply type the at symbol, and you'll see completions for cross-referenceable items
like figures, tables, or sections, as well as citations from your bibliography file.
There is now also a JupyterLab Koto extension.
This extension interprets the Koto markdown in your file, and gives you a more realistic
preview of that document from within the editor.
That's it for the new features I wanted to show you.
There are a couple of other big features coming in Koto 1.4 that I haven't talked about,
because you can hear about them in other PositConf talks.
That's manuscript projects for scholarly writing, and typist support as an alternative
to LaTeX for PDF output.
You might be wondering how you can keep up with changes to Koto.
The most definitive list for the changes in each Koto release is the changelog, and you
can find that on the download page on koto.org.
You can also find them in the news folder on our GitHub repo.
We also like to blog about some of the highlights of each release, so you might want to follow
the Koto blog as well.
The best place to ask questions about new or old features is on the discussion board
on our GitHub repo.
And if there's something new in Koto you'd like to see, there's a feature request category
there too.
Thanks for listening, and I hope you've seen something that you're eager to try out.
Hello, welcome back.
So we got Charlotte live.
Hello, we can see you.
Hello, can you hear me too?
Yes, we can, loud and clear.
Lovely.
You sort of, as a good presenter, already had it off one of the course questions, which
was going to be, it's lovely to get letters, but what if you don't want to wait until next
year's conference?
But, you know, you've been there.
A fact question, when is Koto 1.4 going to be released?
Good question.
The word is fall of this year, so we're already in fall.
I would expect, we're still sort of doing some active development, there'll be a bit
of a cooling off period after that.
I would expect it before Christmas.
That sounds like a lovely Christmas present.
And I see JJ in the audience giving a thumbs up, so Christmas, people, gonna be good.
We got another one.
Oh, okay.
Charlotte, why is the syntax for inline code for Python and Julia slightly different than
R?
That's a good question.
And somebody more knowledgeable than I will know exactly why, but as far as I know, it's
sort of a limitation of the Jupyter engine.
And I know it can be a little bit jarring, because if you're used to R, you're used to
just the backtick and then a sort of bare letter R. The good news is that we're actually
also including that new style syntax for R for the Knitter engine, so that, for instance,
if you're teaching this, there's sort of only one syntax you'll need to teach.
So starting in Koto 1.4, you'll also be able to, in Knitter, say single backtick and then
R in those curly braces, that same syntax will work for you.
That's really fun to watch Charlotte explain, and Carlos go like, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
It's excellent.
Multicolumn documents, specifically multicolumn PDFs, is that possible in Quarter?
Yeah, totally possible.
That's possible now.
It is one of the areas where our documentation is perhaps a little bit hard to find, but
you want to hunt around on the website for the layout attribute.
Most of our examples show that with HTML, so it's really easy to sort of put elements
in columns with that, but that also works in PDF.
That will, that's generally something you might do on an element kind of basis, like
you've got a couple of figures in a table that you want to lay out in multiple columns.
You can also, of course, use any of the LaTeX or, coming soon, typist ways of doing that
at a document level.
It's just going to require a little bit more work on the, well, it's something you're more
likely to have to do inside a template or in the YAML as opposed to actually in your
content.
Okay.
Now you can rattle off support for other languages, if there is.
That's another question?
Yeah.
So the big things, obviously, are Python and also observable.js, but anything that has
a Jupyter kernel, any language that has a Jupyter kernel, you can use.
Okay.
So I'll leave it up to you if your favorite language, you've got to identify if your favorite
language has a Jupyter kernel, and if it does, you can use Cordo.
All right.
Good.
So doing sort of a bit of an outlook as my last question, what are new features that
you would like to develop in the next year or two for Cordo?
Oh, that's a good question.
And I mostly am working on the documentation side of things and getting people on board
to Cordo side of things.
So most of the things I want to do aren't necessarily building new features in Cordo,
but making sure people can find the features they're looking for and that we're helping
on board people onto Cordo.
I personally think we could do some pretty big improvements to our Cordo.org website.
So let me know if you've also got ideas about that.
I think that's something that you'll see coming soon.
All right.
The placer GitHub issues and discussions for this, right?
To give feedback.
Yes.
Yes, definitely.
Yeah.
And that's actually something I should point out, that it's a little confusing because
everything happens on the Cordo-CLI repo, but you are most welcome to ask questions
there about the website, about the documentation, anything that goes a little bit beyond the
actual command line interface itself.
Okay.
Thank you very much.
So let's give a hand up for Charlotte.